The Special Jurisdiction for Peace (JEP), a tribunal created under a 2016 peace deal to prosecute former members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels and military leaders for alleged war crimes, has started exhumation work in a cemetery in the municipality of Dabeiba, it said in a statement late on Saturday.

“This process is taking place after a series of voluntary testimonies, in which an ex-member of the Army indicated they had knowledge of illegitimate deaths presented as people killed in combat by agents of the state in Dabeiba,” the JEP said.

“It is presumed that in the Dabeiba cemetery the remains of 50 people presented as killed in combat or false positives will be found,” the statement added.

The term false positives refers to civilians murdered by members of the military and registered as guerrilla fighters killed in combat so that soldiers could receive benefits for conducting apparently successful anti-insurgency missions.

False positive killings numbered at least 2,248 between 1998 and 2014. The majority of the murders took place during the term of former President Alvaro Uribe, according to the attorney general’s office.

Dozens of army officials have been arrested and convicted of involvement in the killings, with some appearing before the JEP to testify and receive lighter sentences than they would under the ordinary justice system.

The Defense Ministry said in a statement late on Saturday that members of the military are cooperating with the JEP.

Some human rights groups say the number of false positives could be as high as 4,000.

Preliminary information indicates most of the presumed victims in the Dabeiba grave will be men aged between 15 and 56 who resided in Medellin, the JEP added. Some were disabled.

Seven bodies have so far been recovered since the exhumations began on Dec. 9, the JEP said, without specifying the dates or causes of their deaths.

A figure of 50 bodies would make it one of the largest-ever massacres committed by the armed forces.

Colombia’s five-decade internal conflict between guerrilla groups, right-wing paramilitaries, drug gangs and the army has killed more than 260,000 people and displaced millions. Figures of those forcibly disappeared vary widely, but number in the tens of thousands.

Colombia’s so-called “false positives” scandal is centered around the extrajudicial killings of thousands of civilians by the military that dressed their victims as guerrillas to present them as combat kills to the media.

While governmental and non-governmental organizations had been denouncing the practice for years, the Colombian government of then-President Alvaro Uribe denied the armed forces were killing civilians until late 2008.

The scandal broke after prosecution investigators linked the bodies of unidentified rebel fighters found in the north of the country to people who had been reported missing in Soacha, a city south of the capital Bogota.

Investigators found out that the military en masse was luring civilians to secluded areas, executed them, dressed them up as guerrillas and presented the body as a combat kill.
How bad things got

In a June 2015 report, the Prosecutor General’s Office said it had found that the armed forces and civilian collaborators had killed 4,475 civilians since 1986.

The same office said that 5,137 officials were implicated in the extrajudicial killings. More than 900, mostly low-ranking officials, had been convicted. Almost all of them were sent to prison, according to the prosecution.

A 2018 academic study indicated that as many as 10,000 civilians could have been murdered by the military between 2002 and 2010. This would mean that more than half of the 16,000 combat kills reported that year were murdered civilians, and not guerrillas as initially claimed.

Gloria Astrid Martínez last saw her son on the morning of 8 February 2008. After breakfast, Daniel, 21, left their home in Soacha, a downtrodden suburb of Colombia’s capital, to start a new job working on wealthy countryside estates.

“He told me he found a job that would pay so much I wouldn’t have to work any more,” recalled Martínez. “It sounded too good to be true, but he insisted, so he left.”

Eight months later, Daniel’s body was found clothed in jungle fatigues in a mass grave near the Venezuelan border. Soldiers from the Colombian army had lured Daniel with the promise of work to the city of Ocaña, 414 miles from Bogotá, where they murdered him and declared him a rebel fighter in order to boost their statistics in the war against leftist insurgents.
Colombia acts on massacres – punishing whistleblower and promoting officers
Read more

The inflated figures, dubbed “false positives”, were used to justify US aid military packages while the officers who carried out the executions were rewarded with promotions and time off.

When news of the killings first broke 2008, the scandal engulfed the Colombian military: dozens of senior officers were fired, and many rank-and-file soldiers went to prison.

But a new study co-authored by a former police colonel alleges that the practice was far more widespread than previously reported: according to authors Omar Rojas Bolaños and Fabian Leonardo Benavides, approximately 10,000 civilians were executed by the army between 2002 and 2010 – more than three times the number tallied by human rights groups.

In their book Extrajudicial Executions in Colombia, 2002-2010 – Blind Obedience in Fictitious Battlefields, the authors describe how Colombia’s army systematically killed civilians to boost their body counts.

“We can call them ‘false positives’ or ‘extrajudicial executions’, but really these were cold-blooded murders,” said Rojas, who previously served 31 years as a police officer. “They were meticulously planned and carried by all ranks.” Rojas said disabled boys were specifically targeted because of their vulnerability as well as a handful of military men who were suspected of whistleblowing.

“This isn’t just something that happened in the past: we are still finding ‘false positive’ cases today,” Rojas said. “It’s not with the same intensity as before, and now they call them ‘military errors’.”

Colombia’s largest rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc), signed a peace deal with the government in November 2016, formally ending 52 years of civil war that left 220,000 dead and over seven million displaced, mostly civilians. State-aligned paramilitaries and other leftwing groups contributed to the bloodshed, with atrocities committed by all sides.

President Juan Manuel Santos – who was awarded the Nobel peace prize for shepherding through the deal – served as defense minister from 2006 until 2009, at the the height of the “false positive” killings.

Activists say neither Santos nor his predecessor Álvaro Uribe have been called to account over the scandal, though Uribe faces several separate investigations over alleged war crimes. A key witness in one case was murdered in Medellín last month.

Colombia’s government has often brushed off the scandal as the actions of a few rogue individuals.

“‘False positives’ were not just a problem of a few bad apples,” said José Miguel Vivanco, Americas director at Human Rights Watch. “These apparently widespread and systematic extrajudicial killings were committed by troops attached to virtually all brigades in every single army division across Colombia.”

The soldier who recruited Daniel is currently serving a 39-year sentence, along with many other middle and low ranking officers. But not a single general has been convicted.

For Martínez, who has received death threats over her fight for justice, the impunity is galling.

“They say the pain of loss gets easier everyday but that’s a lie, it gets worse,” she said, her voice cracking. “The state should protect its people, not kill them.”



(Bogotá) – Extensive previously unpublished evidence implicates many Colombian army generals and colonels in widespread and systematic extrajudicial killings of civilians between 2002 and 2008, Human Rights Watch said in a report released today.

The 95-page report, “On Their Watch: Evidence of Senior Army Officers’ Responsibility for False Positive Killings in Colombia,” presents evidence strongly suggesting that numerous generals and colonels knew or should have known about “false positive” killings, and may have ordered or otherwise actively furthered them. Prosecutors are investigating at least 3,000 of these cases, in which army troops under pressure to boost body counts in their war against armed guerrilla groups killed civilians and reported them as combat fatalities. Hundreds of lower-ranking soldiers have been convicted, but just a handful of colonels and no generals.
Report Cover for On Their Watch: Evidence of Senior Army Officers’ Responsibility for False Positive Killings in Colombia
June 24, 2015
On Their Watch

Evidence of Senior Army Officers’ Responsibility for False Positive Killings in Colombia

    Download the full report

“False positive killings amount to one of the worst episodes of mass atrocity in the Western Hemisphere in recent years, and there is mounting evidence that many senior army officers bear responsibility,” said José Miguel Vivanco, executive Americas director at Human Rights Watch. “Yet the army officials in charge at the time of the killings have escaped justice and even ascended to the top of the military command, including the current heads of the army and armed forces.”

A Human Rights Watch analysis of Attorney General’s Office data shows that prosecutors have identified more than 180 battalions and other tactical units – attached to virtually all brigades and in every army division at the time – that allegedly committed extrajudicial killings between 2002 and 2008. Evidence detailed in the report shows that commanders of the brigades and tactical units responsible for a significant number of killings – as well as top army leaders – at least knew or should have known about the crimes, and therefore may be criminally liable as a matter of command responsibility.

Human Rights Watch also obtained recordings and transcriptions of testimony to prosecutors from military personnel implicated in false positives who reported that their superiors, including generals and colonels, allegedly knew of, or planned, ordered, or otherwise facilitated the crimes. 

Some of the army officers who commanded the 11 brigades more closely analyzed in the report later became top military leaders. For example, prosecutors’ data show they are investigating:

    At least 44 alleged extrajudicial killings by 4th Brigade troops during the period retired Gen. Mario Montoya commanded it. He became the army’s top commander in 2006-2008;

    At least 113 alleged extrajudicial killings by 4th Brigade troops when retired Gen. Óscar González Peña commanded it. He became the army’s top commander in 2008-2010;

    At least 28 alleged extrajudicial killings by 4th Brigade troops when Gen. Juan Pablo Rodríguez Barragán commanded it. As the current commander of the armed forces, he is the country’s top military official, and oversees all three military branches, including the army; and

    At least 48 alleged extrajudicial killings by 9th Brigade troops during the period Gen. Jaime Lasprilla Villamizar commanded it. He is now the army’s top commander.

The report is based on a Human Rights Watch review of extensive, hereto unpublished, prosecutor’s office data; criminal case files; witness testimony, much of it previously unpublished; judicially ordered recordings of retired Lt. Col. Robinson González del Río’s phone conversations made by justice authorities after his arrest for false positives; and interviews with prosecutors, witnesses, victims’ families, and their lawyers, among other sources.

“Prosecutors confront serious obstacles to advancing their cases, ranging from reprisals against key witnesses to a lack of cooperation by military authorities,” Vivanco said. “And many – possibly hundreds – of false positive cases remain in the military justice system, which for all practical purposes guarantees impunity.”

Human Rights Watch documented threats, attacks, and harassment against soldiers who have testified against superiors in false positive cases. On October 27, 2014, Nixón de Jesús Cárcamo, who had confessed and had been providing information to prosecutors about his superiors’ alleged role in false positive cases, was murdered in the 11th Brigade’s military detention center.

Prosecutors told Human Rights Watch that military personnel often resist handing over army documents that are crucial to their investigations, such as those that ordered the supposed operations in which the executions occurred and certified payments to informants in the cases.

Moreover, despite repeated rulings of Colombia’s Constitutional Court and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights calling for human rights violations to be exclusively investigated and tried by civilian justice authorities, prosecutors say that scores – possibly hundreds – of false positive cases remain in the military justice system. This poses a major impediment to accountability, especially given the evidence documented in the report that the military justice system failed to take basic steps to investigate false positives when most cases were under its jurisdiction, and that at least some military judges actively helped troops cover up the crimes.

Human Rights Watch reviewed judicially ordered audio recordings of González del Río’s phone calls with a military judge and a man who appears to be a colonel linked to a senior office in the military justice system, both of whom offered to help him after he was arrested for false positives, further highlighting the system’s lack of independence and credibility. The colonel appears to offer support for getting González del Río’s case transferred from civilian to military courts, and expresses hope that he will soon be released from detention.

There have also been shortcomings within the Attorney General’s Office, including overwhelming caseloads, as well as the distribution of cases from the same military unit among different prosecutors, which hinders contextualized investigations that are material to the prosecution of high-ranking perpetrators.

The Colombian government should order military authorities to cooperate in investigations, assign sufficient prosecutors to the cases, and protect witnesses and their families, Human Rights Watch said. It should also ensure that any transitional justice measures included in a peace agreement with armed guerrilla groups do not hinder accountability for false positives.

In 2012, Colombia enacted the Legal Framework for Peace, a constitutional amendment that paves the way for impunity for atrocities by guerrilla groups, paramilitaries, and the military if a peace agreement is reached with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas. The amendment empowers Congress to limit the scope of prosecutions for atrocities to individuals found “most responsible” and provide statutory immunity to everyone else; to exempt war crimes from criminal investigation if they are not determined to have been systematic; and to apply “alternative penalties” to all those convicted, including those deemed most responsible.

The Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) is monitoring false positive proceedings in Colombia and could open an investigation if it determines that national authorities are unwilling or unable genuinely to investigate and prosecute them. The office has said with regard to the Legal Framework for Peace that a sentence that is grossly or manifestly inadequate would “vitiate the genuineness” of the proceeding. In other words, it could trigger an ICC investigation.

The Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC should continue to closely monitor proceedings in false positive cases, Human Rights Watch said.

The United States government should enforce human rights conditions on military aid to Colombia, including the requirement that human rights cases be “subject only to civilian jurisdiction” and that the military cooperate with prosecutors in such cases. In light of the evidence that these two conditions are not being met, the US should suspend the part of military aid that depends on Colombia’s compliance with them, Human Rights Watch said.

“Colombia needs to ensure that any transitional justice measures enacted as part of a future peace agreement don’t deny victims’ families justice in false positive cases,” Vivanco said. “If Colombia doesn’t bring those most responsible to justice, the International Criminal Court should open a formal investigation.”

Examples of Testimony Implicating Generals

    A former commander of troops in the 16th Brigade testified to prosecutors and before a judge that his brigade commander, Gen. Henry William Torres Escalante, ordered, planned, and covered up false positives. Prosecutors are investigating at least 66 alleged extrajudicial killings by 16th Brigade troops during the period Torres Escalante commanded it;

    Several soldiers and officers have provided testimony to prosecutors implicating González Peña in at least having known about false positives as commander of the 4th Brigade and later as the head of the Joint Caribbean Command;

    González del Río, who has publicly admitted responsibility for at least 27 false positives, told prosecutors that several generals knew of, authorized, and/or covered up such crimes by his troops. His testimony named General Rodríguez Barragán, then-4th Brigade commander and now top commander of the armed forces, and retired General Hernando Pérez Molina, then-3rd Division commander, among others; and

    According to González del Río’s testimony to prosecutors, retired General Montoya, the army’s top commander between February 2006 and November 2008, pressured subordinate commanders to increase body counts, punished them for failing to do so, and was the principal “motivator” for false positives. In testimony to the prosecutor’s office, another senior army officer who has confessed to false positives blamed the killings on Montoya’s “policy” of demanding combat kills.

Reprisals Against Witnesses

    On October 27, 2014, Cárcamo was murdered in the 11th Brigade’s military detention center, where he was being held on false positive charges. Eleven days earlier, he told prosecutors that he feared for his life and that if he was killed, the people he was accusing were responsible;

    There is compelling evidence that the 2013 rape of a soldier’s wife by unidentified men was in retaliation for the soldier’s testimony against an army colonel. The soldier, who has also received death threats, is a key witness in false positive cases against the colonel and other officers and soldiers; and

    Sergeant Carlos Eduardo Mora’s testimony has contributed to the conviction of a lieutenant colonel and numerous other soldiers for false positives. In retaliation, he has received death threats, and senior army officers have harassed and sought to stigmatize him. He reported that in 2013, army officials attempted to check him into a psychiatric clinic against his will, apparently trying to discredit him, and that in 2014, a general made statements in front of him and a large group of fellow army counterintelligence personnel strongly insinuating that he was a “traitor.” In April 2015, the army opened a disciplinary investigation against him for making statements to the media about false positives – and the abuse he has been subject to as a witness – without the authorization of his superiors. 

